the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
click in your response
alright let's just do 10 seconds on the
clicker question
okay so 82% I like it when we get into
the 90s just FYI for these so since this
is similar to one we did last time it's
just to remind you again of the first
part of problem set 1 where we have this
material that you need to learn how to
cover so does anyone want to tell me how
they got the right answer and this is
not going to be a great prize there's
going to be a better prize later
this is American Chemical Society pen
for this one since we had a similar
question last time everyone I should
have told you there's gonna be a better
prize later now no one's gonna
everyone's going to wait okay
see um see if that's turned on nope oh
no one gave oh wait so you find the
limiting reactant by dividing the amount
of moles for both by the molar
coefficient and you see that it's at the
O and then you just do 12 times the
molar fraction which is just one al2o3
for every three FeO and you get four
great so if you haven't practiced these
yet go ahead and practice yeah
okay
so let's think about where we were what
we were talking about on Friday we're
talking about discovery of the electron
and the nucleus and realized through the
experiments that the atom is mostly
empty space
but there is this concentrated small
part of the nucleus that can deflect
alpha particles or ping-pong balls and
this is a really small concentrated part
so that would be like the head of a pin
and room somewhat bigger than this or a
pea in the size of a sports arena these
are the nucleus is very tiny compared to
the atom and the atom is is again mostly
empty space
so this discovery was amazing of these
subatomic particles and it was really
kind of changing what people were
thinking about so at that time they
started to realize in doing these
experiments and the experiments I'm
going to tell you today that they needed
a different way of thinking about matter
and to explain the observations that
scientists were making at the time they
needed to think about the fact that
radiation had both wave-like and
particle-like properties and matter had
also wave-like and particle-like
properties and also that energy is
quantized into these discrete bundles
called photons so we're going to be
talking about these these new
discoveries and the data that didn't fit
today and how we came up with this new
sort of mechanics that help to explain
the properties that were being observed
so we're going to start today with a
wave particle duality of light so we're
going to talk about light as a wave and
we're gonna first talk about the
characteristics of waves which is a
little review and then we're going to
talk about light as a particle and get
into the photoelectric effect which was
a really important series of experiments
that help scientists understand what was
going on so first we'll just have a
little review about waves so some of you
come from places that you probably don't
have oceans nearby your
now living in a place that does have an
ocean nearby so you can go take the blue
line to Revere Beach I always find doing
chemistry problem sets very relaxing on
the beach and you can watch the water
level go up and down in this repeated
periodic fashion and so if you haven't
experienced water waves you should
absolutely do that
so waves have this periodic variation so
you could have average water level the
water level will go up and then go down
and go up and go down from high levels
to low levels this same behavior is
observed for other types of waves such
as sound waves so here you would have
the average density and the sound wave
can go to higher density lower density
higher density lower density and the
same periodic behavior is also observed
with white light or electromagnetic
radiation is also a periodic function
but here you have this periodic
variation of an electric field so we
have whether it's water waves or if we
have sound waves or light waves we
always have this periodic behavior and
you can define this periodic behavior by
a number of different terms which we'll
talk about now mostly we'll be focused
on light waves today but these terms can
apply to other types of waves as well so
we have amplitude and that's the
deviation from the average level so you
can have a positive amplitude or a
negative amplitude here so this is the
height of the wave
you also have wavelength where the
abbreviation is lambda and this is the
distance between successive Maxima so
the distance from this Maxima to this
Maxima is one wavelength we also have
frequency of the wave which helps to
define it oh I should say wavelength can
be up here or down here they should be
exactly the same so frequency
our new is the number of cycles per unit
time so we talked about wave length
amplitude and frequency and as you turn
the page we can also talk about the
period of the wave so one over the
frequency is the called the period and
it's the time it takes for one cycle to
occur so the time that you go from one
maximum to the other maximum for one
cycle is the period of the wave as with
most things in chemistry there are units
always think about your units so units
of frequency are cycles per second and
that's also called a Hertz so you will
often just see per second but sometimes
you'll see Hertz in these problems so
those can be used interchangeably and
one other term is intensity which is
equal to the amplitude squared so for
all of these waves they're these certain
characteristics you think about the
amplitude of the wave the wavelength and
the frequency the period of the wave and
also the intensity of the wave so now if
we're thinking about light waves which
we will be most of the time we can also
think about the speed of that light that
is traveling and so at time zero if
we're thinking about the time it is
gonna take this little orange dot to
move this this peak here that's labeled
to move from here to here moved one
wavelength so it has moved to this
second location the time it takes to do
that is going to be one over the
frequency and if we think about then the
speed at which this will happen that
it'll go from here to here at time 0 to
time 1 over the frequency or one period
as we just defined now we can
out this equation and see that the speed
is going to be equal to the wave length
lambda so that's the distance travel the
wave travelled one wavelength and the
time it took the time elapsed was one
period or one over the frequency and
then we can define one of the equations
that you probably don't really need to
have defined for you which is that the
speed of light is equal to the
wavelength times the frequency and this
is in usually units of meters per second
so most people already know what this
speed of light we're talking again about
light here is equal to and it has a
constant speed so electromagnetic
radiation has a constant speed the speed
of light and the speed of light is
abbreviated C equals the wavelength
times the frequency which is two point
nine nine seven nine times ten to the
eighth meters per second so most of you
have seen this before and are well aware
of it this also has some of the
conversions on here speed of light is
quite fast and often people have the
expression you know how fast did you see
and you're working at the speed of light
and that's a pretty valid kind of thing
to indicate that you're doing things
very very quickly because that is fast
and in fact if we had the earth here and
the moon here light would go like that
and it should take about 1.2 seconds to
do that so speed of light very quickly
all right so what's also important in
thinking about this is that the speed of
light is a constant which is going to
mean that these terms are related
okay so first before you move on let's
do a clicker question and you can all
test out that your clickers are working
again
how are we doing okay let's do ten more
seconds
okay 92 that's awesome alright does
someone want to explain how they knew
that how they could eliminate one and
two versus three and four and get this
one right
sure well it looks like this problem is
asking us to look at two different
things the wavelength of these waves and
the frequency and you can look at the
distance between the two peaks in both
of the waves to see how short or long
the wavelength is wavelength has a much
shorter distance between Peaks and B
does and then you're also looking for
new the frequency so within a period of
time you can fit more more waves of a
and B and so it has a higher frequency
so this this prize here this prize here
is Lego and Lego to make girl chemists
so this is a little Lego girl chemist
that comes with pretty colored
Erlenmeyer flasks so that's
okay yeah so the trick with that
question you just looked which was the
longer wavelength and then you could
rule out that from the picture and also
realize that there's connections because
of the constant speed of light between
the frequency and the wavelength so when
you're talking about wavelengths of
light
you always have C is always equal to a
product of the wavelength times the
frequency so they're not independent of
each other and if you know one you will
know the other so this is something
you'll come in very handy as you're
doing these problems okay so let's talk
about light for a minute and look at
these different colors of light so we go
from red at long wavelengths to violet
at the shorter wavelengths and so here
the frequency here the wavelength is
decreasing and then if we think about
the corresponding frequencies up here
then if we have long wavelengths what
are we going to have in terms of the
frequency yep
so we will have lower or shorter
frequencies going up to higher
frequencies up here so again we have
this relationship because the speed of
light equals the wavelength times the
frequency so you are not responsible for
memorizing all of the wavelengths but
you should have a sense of the order of
the wavelengths and certainly the
relationship between wavelength and
frequency and there's going to be a
number of problems later and we're
talking about colors of light that are
admitted from things or colors that are
absorbed where it's really convenient to
sort of have the order of wavelengths
memorized so I thought I would just help
you out with this by this nice little
song from from they must be giants and
here comes science album which should
help you always remember the order of
the wavelength so let's just see if this
will play
our red hose from orange y is for yellow
and G is for green peas for blue indigo
is for violet and that smells right
okay so I think you get the idea there
and it sticks in your head and you may
remember this for the rest of your life
even if you don't want to that's a very
catchy song in fact my six-year-old
daughter I think learned it when she was
about three and then would get very
upset if anybody drew the colors that
were not in the appropriate order of the
rainbow and she would come around and
correct their work so anyway it's sort
of made her into a little bit of a holy
terror but we're working on that okay so
in addition to the visible light which
is actually a very small part of all of
the range of waves and so we have visual
light in here we can also think about
other ways that go from then long
wavelength here and low frequency to
short wavelength and high frequency so
we have radio waves on the long
wavelength end and we have then
microwaves microwaves are I think
college students best friends and as I
am teaching this course since many of
you are freshmen I feel the need to
impair my many years of experience at
MIT with you point number one just use
the popcorn button on the microwave
don't think about how long is it just
use the popcorn button on the microwave
I used to live in Simmons for a while
3:00 a.m. fire drills or fire things
because someone did not push the popcorn
button on the microwave while making
popcorn anyway
life lesson number one microwaves so so
molecules behave differently in these
different kinds of waves so you can
rotate infrared you're looking at
vibrations of course here visible light
we also have UV light so when you go to
the beach on the Green Line this weekend
to do problem set number two and look at
the waves you'll want to wear
sunscreen because UV is in fact
dangerous so wear sunscreen advice
number 2 then we have x-rays hope
hopefully most of you do not know one of
the uses to detect broken bones and as
you'll hear later on x-rays can also be
used to solve structures of molecules of
atomic resolution and then on the very
short wavelength and we have gamma rays
as well so again you're not responsible
for memorizing all these numbers but you
have should have a sense of the order of
these different types of rays of the
electromagnetic spectrum
what's it short what's that long
wavelengths
alright so waves have other properties
and one of the most important properties
of waves is that they can superimpose so
if you have two waves one drawn up here
and one drawn down here that are in
phase with each other which means that
their troughs are at the same place
their Peaks are at the same place you
can get constructive interference and
that would look like this so you have
these waves come together in phase and
you get this much larger constructive
interference this property can be very
important as we'll talk a little bit
more about later
you can also have what's called
destructive interference so when the
when you have out of phase waves and the
clicker you can tell me what that should
look like
okay ten seconds now it looks like it's
back to being a darker color box in the
corner just likes to bury it up on its
own okay it's one second whoo all right
98% we don't have to explain that one
that one was pretty pretty clear so here
you had complete they were completely
out of phase so you had total
destructive interference so that just
looks like a straight a straight line so
the combination of constructive and
destructive interference actually has a
number of of practical applications so
people who are very interested in
constructive and destructive
interference include people who are
designing Symphony halls or classrooms
actually this is one of the better
classrooms in terms of the acoustics and
the Boston Symphony is actually
supposedly the third best in the world
in terms of acoustics and mighty
students get nice discounts go check it
out another practical application was in
designing noise cancelling headphones I
brought a pair if some of you have never
tried them and you want to come down
after class you can give them a try and
see see what you think these headphones
have bought the boss headphones were
developed by a former MIT professor he
passed away last year he taught at MIT
taught acoustics for many years and he
was riding on an airplane once and it
was just so loud he was thinking wow I
was wondering if there a way I can
design some good headphones to cancel
this noise um and he did and many
billions and billions and billions of
dollars later so as you are an MIT
student you get a discount on these
headphones so if you're gonna buy them
buy them while you're here also when he
died the majority share of his stock
went to MIT so you will buy them get a
disc
and you'll also be giving MIT money by
buying these because we get a lot of
money for this so I feel like this
brings up a really important point that
I just want to stress and I'll probably
mention a couple times that the material
that you learn in your classes here at
MIT and in this class you will learn a
lot of really useful things some of that
will lead to money and as you make lots
of money you should remember where you
learned that and know that I take both
cash and checks okay
another practical application is
actually in my own research so we have a
series that I'm going to be using I
mentioned to bring some different faces
in the first video I'm going to show you
in this series is actually me so it's
not a different face but when I ask
other people to make videos about how
they were using chemical principles in
their research they said okay but you're
gonna do one too right Kathy so it's
like yes I guess I'm gonna do one and
that just happens to be the first one
that I'm going to show so another
practical use of constructive and
destructive interference has to do with
x-rays and you can use constructive and
destructive interference to determine
the structures of very tiny things
protein molecules or nucleic acids in
your body so I'm gonna try to run this
movie now we'll see this is a demo good
to try it out with me and see how how
this is gonna work so see if I and my
name is Kathy drennan and I'm a
professor of chemistry and biology at
MIT and I'm also a professor and
investigator with the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute and my lab uses the
principles of diffraction in our
research a wave shoots through some kind
of grating you can have light say light
waves shooting through and when the
light waves hit the metal lattice
they'll be diffracted and some of those
waves will be in phase with each other
and will constructively interfere and
you get a bright spot in a diffraction
pattern other waves will be out of phase
and they'll destructively interfere and
you'll see nothing as a result of those
ways from this pattern of spots
no spots you can understand something
about the structure of the grading that
it went through so if I had two
different gratings the diffraction
patterns would be different for these
and so from looking at the diffraction
pattern you can figure out how the sort
of the metal or whatever was ranged and
that generated that pattern this
property works whether it's a metal
grading or a lattice that's made up of
protein molecules because the protein
molecules are small the crystals are
small we use x-rays and a short
wavelength high-energy but because
everything is really tiny we need really
bright x-rays to do this and and I don't
mean high-energy bright I mean intensity
so we need more photons per second so we
have to go to a place called a
synchrotron a research facility that has
really intense x-rays and then we shoot
those x-rays through the crystal collect
this diffraction pattern and then figure
out what the shapes of these molecules
are the structure can tell you so much I
mean there can be big questions of field
about how something works and all of a
sudden you see what the molecule looks
like and you're like ah of course
sometimes there's a problem with the DNA
that then gets translated into a defect
in the protein but people often don't
know you know
why does it matter why does it matter
that the protein has you know as this or
that but we can look at it and figure it
out so we can compare what the protein
structure looks like for a healthy
individual with a protein structure from
someone who has a mutation all of a
sudden you might see well the vitamin
that this protein needs can't bind
anymore so we can have a sense of what's
wrong and then sometimes you can figure
out how to treat it once you know what
the problem is sometimes there'll be a
protein molecule that everyone knows is
important and everyone wants to know
what it looks like but you might be the
one who does it you might be the one to
figure out what it looks like and you'll
be the first one you know you'll see
these patterns these diffraction
patterns and you'll build this model and
all of a sudden you'll be like whoa
that's not what people expected and it'd
just be this incredible discovery so you
know you're sort of an explorer the
molecular world when you're at Kostal
agra fur
okay so okay so that's the first in the
series we're going to have another one
this week as well because we have a lot
of history so we got to counter it with
a lot of current research and so you'll
be learning about quantum dots also this
week okay so those are some of the
characteristics of waves that are really
important and we talked about light as a
wave now we're gonna talk about light as
a particle light is a wave it's a little
bit easier to grasp light as a particle
is a little bit more confusing and it
wasn't it took a while for people to
really appreciate that light had
particle-like properties ie it was
quantized and this really came out of
the photoelectric effect so what were
people doing and this is around the time
in the discovery of the electron and the
nucleus and what scientists were having
fun doing we're taking beams of UV light
and hitting metal surfaces and seeing if
they could eject electrons which have
been discovered it's like let's get some
electrons out of those metal surfaces we
know they're there
let's see them come off and characterize
their properties so they found that if
they had a UV but use some UV light and
the frequency of that UV light was below
something below a threshold that they
refer to as the threshold frequency so
we have nu 0 here if the frequency was
lower than Somma that this magic number
for frequency nothing would happen but
if they increased the frequency if it
was greater than or equal to this
threshold frequency then all of a sudden
they would see something they would see
an electron being ejected and the
electron would come off with a certain
amount of kinetic energy ke and kinetic
energy is equal to 1/2 times the mass
times the velocity squared all right so
they decided let's characterize this uhm
let's vary some parameters and see what
happens
so they looked at constant intensity of
this light and they changed the
frequency and then they looked at the
number of electrons that were coming off
and so below this threshold frequency no
electrons came off I just told you about
that then when they were at the
threshold they saw electrons coming off
and then they increased the frequency
even more but they weren't getting any
more electrons hmm okay this was
interesting so I thought what else can
we sort of measure here and they knew
how to measure the kinetic energy so
it's like let's start measuring the
kinetic energy of these electrons that
are coming off so they plotted kinetic
energy of the ejected electrons as a
function of the frequency of the
incoming light and again below the
threshold they saw nothing but above the
threshold they saw the kinetic energy
increase proportionally to the increase
in the frequency of the light and this
didn't really make any sense from what
they knew at the time they they didn't
have a way to relate kinetic energy and
frequency so they really weren't sure
what this was about but they were having
fun doing experiments he's like let's
keep going let's let's vary more
properties so then they decided to look
at kinetic how the kinetic energy of the
electron was affected by changing the
intensity of the light and they thought
that if you increase the intensity you'd
have sort of more energy in your system
you should have more kinetic energy but
that did not seem to be the case they
increase the intensity the kinetic
energy same the same and that they were
having trouble wrapping their head
around it but they said all right well
let's collect some more data so now they
decided to look at the number of ejected
electrons as a function of the intensity
and they really didn't think there
should be much difference increase that
intensity number of electrons should be
the same but experiment showed otherwise
so when they increased the intensity
more electrons came off and this is sort
of where they were in the field it
almost seemed like everything they did
was sort of opposite of what they
expected it's a pretty exciting time
actually in science when you're getting
results that are unexpected and some of
this data kind of sat around for a while
and then Einstein decided to take a
little look at it and see see what he
thought of this data and people were
studying all sorts of things they're
taking different metals different of a
different metal you have a different
threshold frequency and so people were
characterizing different metals and
figuring out the threshold frequency for
all the different metals and then
plotting the kinetic energy of the
ejected electrons as a function of the
frequency and you look at this you
realize huh there's different threshold
frequencies for the different metals but
they all seem to have these straight
lines that all seem to have the same
slope and sometimes when you look at the
discoveries of really amazing people
like Einstein you're sort of thinking
well basically what he did was sort of
solve the equation for a straight line
you realize hey maybe I can contribute
to science as well so we had a whole lot
of straight lines here and when you have
that you can solve for the slope so
that's what he did he solved for the
slope and he got this number six point
six to six times ten to the minus 34
joule-seconds and he saw that number and
he's like I've heard that number before
Planck came up with that number when he
was stunning blackbody radiation so
different totally different phenomenon
but yet the number comes up again
Planck's constant also known as H now
that seemed like a really strange
coincidence so there must be something
to this number
so if you look at this plot we can also
think about what the y-axis is so the
interests are the y-intercept is minus
Planck's constant times that threshold
frequency and when you have all of this
you can now write the equation for the
straight line in terms of all of these
variables and so we're gonna y-axis here
is kinetic energy so we'll solve that
equation now in terms of kinetic energy
so kinetic energy is going to be equal
we have our x axis here the x axis is
frequency and again now the slope of the
line we know is Planck's constant so
that's H and the answer is y intercept
or B was minus H times the threshold
frequency and this is a very important
equation so just to define those terms
again we have the frequency here
Planck's constant Planck's constant
times the frequency is an energy it is
the energy of the incident light or the
incoming light YZ sub I and on this side
over here we have that threshold
frequency again we also have Planck's
constant so Planck's constant times the
fresh hole threshold frequency is
another energy term which is called the
threshold energy or more commonly a work
function so the kinetic energy equals
the incident energy the incident energy
of the incoming light minus the work
function which has to do with the
threshold frequency which depends on the
medal in question so this was a really
important equation and Einstein realized
that the energy of light is proportional
to its frequency and it's proportional
by Planck's constant and this really
changed how
people had been thinking about about
energy and all of a sudden a lot of
those observations made sense now
Einstein of course did had many
important discoveries in his career but
this one was the one that he personally
felt was the most revolutionary so I
don't know he people are always there
worse critic but even he realized that
this was this was kind of important and
in terms of units cuz units huh units
always important notice usually you'll
see energy in joules or kilojoules and
Planck's constant has the units of
joules seconds and frequency is per
second or Hertz so in this equation your
units work out so from this idea then we
have this notion that light is made up
of these energy packets which people
call photons where the energy of that
photon depends on its frequency so we
can go back to the photoelectric effect
now and start thinking about those
observations and and and try to
rationalize now what we had been seeing
so here's this new model for the
photoelectric effect where we can think
about the energy of that incoming photon
or that incident photon if it's greater
than the work function then you'll eject
a metal from you eject an electron from
the metal and any left over energy is
the kinetic energy of that ejected
electron so we can think about that here
that here we have the energy coming in
of the incident photon we have to get
over that threshold frequency or
overcome that work function so you have
this minus this and the leftover is the
kinetic energy so we can also write it
this way that the kinetic energy equals
the incident energy minus the work
function so if you just have enough
energy to to do this you have very small
kinetic energy but if you have a lot of
extra energy once you've overcome
the work function you'll have more
kinetic energy we can also write the
equation this way that the incident
energy equals the kinetic energy plus
the work function okay so let's just try
a clicker question on this and we're
gonna go back and look at those graphs
and think about what they mean
all right let's do 10 more seconds
yeah okay so here the trick was to think
about what the work function is and how
much energy was coming in of the photon
but here the energy is lower than the
threshold needed so you're not going to
get any electrons ejected let's try one
more let's see if we can get up to 90%
so now we've changed the energies or the
energy but not the the threshold energy
okay ten more seconds
yeah ninety-eight percent yeah so now
we're over the threshold energy so we
need to subtract the threshold energy
and the remaining is the kinetic energy
okay so this is these are the kinds of
questions we have on this and now let's
go back and think about these plots
again so we don't have these the second
time in your notes but you have them one
time and let's just think about how this
makes sense now with the new equations
that Einstein helped helped us achieve
so in the top here we had the surprising
observation that when you increase the
frequency of the light that the kinetic
energy increase well now this makes
sense because if you're increasing the
frequency of the light you're increasing
the incident energy of the photons
coming in and so if you're increasing
you're increasing this frequency so
you're increasing the incident energy
and once you're above the threshold
energy you'll have more extra kinetic
energy coming off as the frequency or
the energy of the incident light comes
up so that makes sense
all right what about intensity we
haven't really talked so much about
intensity so let's consider intensity
for a minute and think about the number
of electrons as well so both of these
are about intensity so let's think about
the number of electrons ejected from a
metal surface we're going to come back
to those plots in a minute sorry to make
you go back and forth in your notes and
that's going to be proportional to the
number of photons so the more photons
you have coming in the more electrons
are going to have coming out that is if
the photons have the appropriate amount
if they're over the threshold the
threshold frequency over the threshold
energy then you're going to have an
electron ejected from the metal surface
so for each photon that has greater the
greater incident energy than the
threshold you'll have an electron being
injected so what is intensity
well the intensity is
is really the photons per second so it's
proportional to the number of photons
being absorbed by the metal and
therefore the number of electrons coming
out of the metal so intensities units
are often in watts you also can do a
conversion in joules per second so the
more the higher the intensity the more
photons the more photons with the
appropriate amount of energy to overcome
that work function the more electrons
coming off so now we can go back and
think about these plots again so here
the relationship between intensity and
kinetic energy was flat and that was
unexpected but the kinetic energy
doesn't doesn't change here since the
intensity means more photons per second
not more energy per photon so you're
just increasing the number of photons if
none of the photons have the appropriate
energy you're not going to have any
electrons coming off but if you have
more photons per second then and they
have the appropriate amount of energy
then you are going to see these
electrons coming off so the number of
electrons admitted does change since
high intensity means more photons more
photons more electrons so these things
that Einstein helped us with these
equations now made sense of the data
that was being observed so the
photoelectric effect was really
important in helping derive these
relationships between energy and
frequency and so in particular the
really important points here is that
light is made up of these photons these
discrete energy packages and each one of
those photons has to have enough energy
in it to overcome the threshold to emit
an electron so energy is proportional to
frequency which was really new and
citing idea at the time T equals
Planck's constant times frequency and
the intensity of light has to do with
the number of photons hitting per second
and if you keep these things in mind
you'll do really well finishing up a
number of the problems on the
photoelectric effect which are in
problem set one okay see you on
Wednesday we're going to do a demo of a
photoelectric effect
you